Documents.
Okay, welcome.
It's my pleasure to introduce JJ Allaire, who's going to speak to us about publishing Jupyter Notebooks with Quarto.
Thank you. Thanks very much. It's really, really exciting to be here this week.
And I am going to talk about a new scientific and technical publishing system called Quarto that has
it's based on Jupyter.
And before I get into all the details of Quarto and how it works with Jupyter,
I want to talk a little bit about the context of the project, our kind of overall motivation and goals.
So many of you here have probably read this paper by Brian and Fernando about
Jupyter and kind of what has made it such an important part of the scientific computing ecosystem.
And they talk about, certainly interactive computing is a big part of it.
But as you can tell from the title of the paper, a really fundamental part of it is
Jupyter as a tool for helping you think and tell stories with data, code and data.
And a big part of using Jupyter is writing.
And writing, when you're using a Jupyter Notebook, kind of helps you think about what you're going to do.
By, oftentimes, by writing about the code you're about to execute,
you maybe think differently about the code and write it a different way. And similarly, when you
present data or visualizations or metrics in a notebook, writing about it helps the reader
understand the subtleties and context of the data better.
And many of you may have also seen the Edward Tufte's
pamphlet, which is sort of a takedown of the reductive style of presenting data with PowerPoint.
And interesting, I think he'd be quite pleased to hear the previous presentation because one of his big examples in this is about how
NASA approved the ill-fated Space Shuttle launch based on a PowerPoint presentation that was quite reductive,
needed to articulate quite a bit more in terms of narrative and assumptions and subtleties.
And I think he'd be pretty encouraged to see that that NASA and the JPL is making extensive use of notebooks for
discussing these kinds of technical things.
But really,
metrics and visualizations don't tell the whole story.
There's assumptions, there's constraints, there's where do we get the data from that are critical.
And I think this leads to the idea that we need tools to help with telling stories from data.
And it turns out that the scientific community, the scientific tool building community, has been working on
this for a long time, starting with tech and literate programming,
through all of the work that has been done on notebooks and various systems, to work on Markdown,
Emacs Org Mode. There's been a lot of work. And I think
in 2023, a lot of that work is really coming together to create the opportunity
to make a very compelling platform for communicating and telling stories with data.
So that sort of brings me to Quarto.
What is Quarto? It's a new open-source scientific and technical publishing system.
It builds on standard Markdown, and it's really,
it's kind of hallmark is it has features that are essential for scientific and technical communication.
It is new, but its roots actually go back over 10 years.
We developed a system called R Markdown that was R-specific.
That was like about 10 years ago, and we evolved that quite a bit over the years, but really felt pretty bad about the fact that the system
wasn't able to serve the entire scientific computing community. It was just R.
And so we actually rewrote it, improved it quite a bit with the lessons learned,
and that was what Quarto represents, which is a sort of multi-language, multi-engine
re-articulation of the things we did in R Markdown.
The project is primarily developed and sponsored by Posit. You might not have heard of Posit.
We used to be called RStudio, and we renamed the company Posit to reflect
the fact that we are doing many of our open-source projects are now multi-language.
Many of our open-source projects are now multi-language.
The company's sponsored a lot of open-source projects over the years, RStudio itself, Tidyverse, Shiny.
So Quarto is sort of in that spirit.
And this is a goal that I don't think needs really a lot of emphasis in this audience.
We all want computational documents.
I think the one thing we talk about a lot on the Quarto team is to help users fall into a pit of success.
So we want to make it easier than not to work reproducibly.
So give people lots of benefits in terms of the type of documents they can produce,
and then have the entire pipeline of producing documents fundamentally reproducible.
Another goal we talk about is looking at the history of tools for writing
and what some of the benefits and trade-offs are.
If you look at Word, it's a very accessible tool.
Lots of people open up Word and they know just what to do with it,
but it actually scales very poorly with document complexity.
You take a tool like LaTeX, which is considerably harder to use at first,
but once you learn how to use it, it absorbs complexity very well over time.
And I think our goal with Quarto is to take Markdown,
which is a base that's simpler and easier to start with,
and evolve it to sort of give it the accessibility of Word,
but also the scalability of systems like LaTeX.
And then finally, single-source publishing.
And again, in 2023, when we write content, it's not just,
hey, I wrote a Word doc, here it is.
It's, I need to publish it on the web.
I want it to look good on the mobile web.
I may need print for scientific publications.
I might be creating an office document.
A lot of the content we create today goes into content management systems.
So basically, I want tools that help me publish my analysis and data and notebooks
that support a wide range of output formats.
So I've sort of described the fundamental requirements for these tools
for computational narratives, being able to interoperate with Jupyter,
handling technical content, code, citations, cross-refs,
lots of output formats, and extensible.
Now, there have been tools like this for Jupyter for a long time.
NbConvert is the obvious one that's been around forever and does all these things.
But in recent years, there's been some new systems developed,
JupyterBook, MISTJS, and Quarto.
And the main, I'd say the main point of departure for these tools is
that they focus a little more on giving you production quality output out of the box,
but also supporting things like citations and cross-references,
and then more complex project types like websites, blogs, and books.
So a lot of these fundamental things have been in NbConvert, NbViewer,
things like that for a long time, but these new tools go quite a bit beyond.
And so I'm going to talk about Quarto in this talk,
but I think the other tools are also very much worth a look.
All right, so what are the basics of Quarto?
How does it work?
Fundamentally, we start with Jupyter and markdown that's either written
or produced by computations in Jupyter.
It ends up going into a system called Pandoc, which is a markdown engine,
which I'll talk a little bit more about a few slides down.
Pandoc itself is able to produce output in lots and lots of formats,
and that's kind of the basic mechanic of how Quarto works.
So I'll give you the most straightforward example that you've seen before
from NbConvert or NbViewer.
There's nothing really special here.
It's just taking a notebook that has a table and a plot and producing a webpage from it.
So again, nothing different or special about that.
But Quarto has lots and lots of options on the order of dozens of options
that you tailor the output that you produce.
So as an example, here I've added some options to the kind of front matter of the notebook.
I want to use a different theme, I want to use a different highlight style,
and I want to let readers comment on the notebook using hypothesis.
So when I render this document, you can see the theme is different,
the highlighting is different, and then you can see this bar on the right
that provides the ability to comment.
So that's a document level.
Those are document level options.
There are also cell level options.
So here I'm again showing some document level options,
and these have to do with how code is displayed to the user.
I'll demo that in a minute.
But then at the cell level, I'm saying I'd like to provide a caption for my figure,
I would like it to be a numbered figure,
and I would like to make it cross-referencable by adding these two options
with this sort of option comment syntax.
So when I render this, you can see the code is indeed hidden,
the caption is there and numbered, and the figure is cross-referencable.
You can see a code menu in the top right, and when I flip that down,
I'm able to show and hide all the code as a reader.
So those are just examples.
There's lots and lots of options to let you customize
kind of the HTML output that you get.
We mentioned lots of formats.
There's actually dozens of formats available.
Here's another example of a docx.
And this is pretty straightforward, just changing the format.
And then I didn't highlight it, but you can see we've got two figures here,
two plots, and we've specified that we want them laid out in two columns.
So when we render this, we see the code and then the plots laid out in two columns.
Another example here is a PDF, and in this case, I'm bringing in a bibliography.
And it turns out that the optimal reading width is considerably less than 8.5 by 11,
so a lot of PDFs, that's why you see a lot of two-column output in journals.
So PDFs don't use the full width of the page,
and web pages don't often use the full width of the page.
So here I'm going to put the citation in the margin,
and I'm also going to specify that when I show my two figures,
I want it to use beyond the width of the main text.
So when I render the PDF, you can see that the margin shows up,
the caption shows up in the margin,
and then my plot and code are able to use the full width
that goes beyond the width of the text.
These have been documents.
You can also create presentations with Quarto using Reveal.js.
This slide deck here was actually created with Quarto.
And here I'm just saying I want my format to be Reveal.js,
and I'd like a logo in the bottom right and slide numbers in the top right.
And then you can see a slide from that where it shows the figures
along with the logo and the numbering.
You notice I didn't show the code here by default.
When you do a presentation, the code is not shown,
but you can show the code.
Here I'm adding a cell option that says,
please do show the code, because in this example,
I might be trying to teach someone about how to build a plot with Seaborn.
And I want to highlight specific line numbers
as I narrate how the plot was constructed.
So here you can see it shows the code and the plot,
and then this line four is highlighted.
And when I advance the slide, then line five will be highlighted.
So this is a good way of explaining code
or explaining how things are done using a slide.
I've sort of focused mostly on individual documents,
but Quarto has a project system that lets you aggregate lots of documents
together.
This is a simple Quarto project file that says,
I want to build a website, some options for the website
and how navigation works on the website,
and then some options that are shared options for all
of the HTML documents in the website.
So that's the basic mechanic of a simple project.
In the real world, there's more configuration that goes on.
Here's an example of the website for the Fast AI Deep Learning
for Coders course.
And here you can see there's a bit of social options related
to social sharing, options related to links back
to the repo that was used to produce the website,
customizing the navigation.
And you can see here, this is now a website
where all of these documents on the left
are separate documents that are all brought together
with navigation into a website.
So that's a website.
Blogs are a little bit different.
The navigation for blogs is different.
And so we have some features that support that.
Here you can see similar, some get oriented options,
some social sharing oriented options, some navigation options.
And here the home page provides like a tiled display
of posts and categories.
So that's another type of aggregate project
that you might see.
And then books are another one, where here I'm
showing I've got a cover image, I've
got an explicit list of chapters.
And when the book is rendered, you
can see the chapters are numbered,
the subsections are numbered.
Cross-references go across chapters
and use the section numbering.
So books, again, slightly different than websites.
They are a website, but they actually
have more structure built into them.
This is a web version of a book.
But when you write a book with Quarto,
it actually supports, there's five different formats.
So it's very useful to have a web version,
but you often want to print version, perhaps a Word
version for mobile readers, an EPUB version.
And then ASCIDoc is actually useful for publishing.
Manning and O'Reilly both use ASCIDoc
as their kind of fundamental sort of underlying format
for publishing books.
OK, so I've covered some of the basics of output formats,
some of the obvious output formats
that you'd expect to see.
But Quarto was built on, as I said,
Pandoc, which has been around for quite a long time.
It's almost 20 years.
It was created by John McFarlane, who's
a philosophy professor at Berkeley.
He's also been very, very active in the standards
community around Markdown.
He was the main author of the Common Mark spec and reference
implementations.
So Pandoc you can think of as Common Mark,
plus many extensions for technical writing,
citations being the foremost of those.
But there are lots of other extensions.
And Pandoc, the reason we love Pandoc so much
as a foundation, it supports dozens of output formats.
That system is extensible.
You can create custom writers for new formats.
You can do lots of filtering of documents.
So it's a great foundation for building a publishing system.
And as you can see, I mentioned the obvious things
like HTML, PDF, and Word.
But it also supports OpenOffice, different presentation types,
lots of different Markdown flavors,
which becomes important in content management systems,
wikis, some other formats you may or may not
have been exposed to, but which are quite important
in various communities.
So it's a really, really powerful and flexible
foundation for creating lots of different types of output.
And we've used that.
We've created some custom formats for popular content
management systems.
So Hugo, you may have heard of, it's for building websites.
They use their own flavor of Markdown
called Goldmark Markdown.
We're able to produce Goldmark Markdown from Cordo.
Docasaurus uses another system for documentation publishing,
uses MDX Markdown, a whole different flavor.
Confluence uses, actually not Markdown at all,
but a custom XML format.
And then O'Reilly uses ASCIDoc.
So we can take that same notebook
that we started off at the beginning, and in this case,
we're going to produce from the notebook Goldmark Markdown.
And now that notebook's available inside a Hugo website
here as a blog post.
Similarly, with Docasaurus, we have the same notebook.
And we tell Cordo to render MDX Markdown.
And then we can see that notebook inside our Docasaurus
site.
Confluence, similarly, same notebook.
Confluence XML is sort of HTML plus plus plus.
There's lots of particularities of it.
But we were able to create a custom writer
so that then your notebook also shows up
inside a Confluence site.
And then finally, I referenced O'Reilly.
We have a bunch of people writing books,
O'Reilly books with Cordo.
You produce the ASCIDoc to O'Reilly spec.
And then they can use that to create their own print,
EPUB, and web versions of the book.
So using Pandoc as a foundation lets
us target this huge range of output formats
and lets you even create your own writers
to target new formats.
Another exciting initiative that we have,
we're actually working with people in the open science
community, some scientific publishers,
as well as the folks who are behind JupyterBook
and Mist.js to kind of create a standard for including notebooks
in scientific publications.
And we're really excited about that.
So there'll be more details on that probably
in the next couple of months, so keep an eye out for that.
So the basic workflow of Cordo, kind of how you use it.
There are two main, I would say, verbs.
One is render, saying take a notebook and create a document.
Here you can see just render the notebook to the default format.
Here we can see render the notebook to docx.
And then the other big verb is preview,
which is render the notebook, but then give me
a live preview of it.
So as I save it and update it, update the preview
so I see what it looks like.
And then I'll talk a little bit about this.
There's another sort of variation
of notebooks that's plain text that you can also use.
I'll describe that in a minute.
So here's a basic workflow where you have a Jupyter notebook
running locally.
And side by side, the web page that's actually
produced from the notebook, as you run cells and save,
the preview automatically updates.
I talked about plain text notebooks.
And actually, there's quite a few different formats
for plain text notebooks.
There's a project called Jupytext,
which translates between IPy and B and plain text formats.
And there are actually 10 different formats,
five .py scripts formats and five markdown-based formats
for representing notebooks in plain text.
And representing notebooks in plain text
can be, for some situations, useful
because you can use any standard text editor.
Works well with version control, although there's
quite a bit of innovation, as we saw,
going on in using notebooks in version control.
But here you can see I've got the options in front matter.
I've got a code cell.
I've got markdown, another code cell, and then
options inside the code cell.
So that's another option.
And if you're using plain text notebooks,
there's a VS Code extension that lets you provide lots of tools
for editing them and also lets you do the sort of things
you might do in a normal notebook,
like running cells and running lines of code.
So that is an option.
And again, it's sort of different tasks and tools
are called for for different projects.
You have the option, of course, to use IPy and B or QMD.
And we also have a JupyterLab extension
that helps out with authoring for IPy and B.
And that rendering pipeline, I showed this before.
For notebooks, we're not going to execute
the notebook by default, so we assume that execution
is done inside JupyterLab.
But you can re-execute everything
if you want for reproducibility or to reflect updated data.
And then the plain text workflow takes the QMD,
turns it into a Jupyter notebook, executes it,
and so on.
Same sort of process.
There are some tools that are available for caching,
because if you're re-executing the notebook every time,
that could be time consuming in a way that's undesirable.
So we have integration with JupyterCache
from the executable books project,
as well as an internal caching system
we have in Cordo called Freeze.
So again, I'm not going to try to plumb the depths
of how all the trade-offs here,
but there's lots of options for kind of how you work,
how you cache things, plain text versus notebooks, et cetera.
There are quite a few ways to extend Cordo.
We have an extension system that encompasses
filters and shortcodes, which are sort of like
creating sort of new markdown syntax
and macros for generating content.
You can write your own formats.
Lots of people have written formats for,
there's probably 15 or 20 formats for academic journals
to produce the LaTeX that's required
for various academic journals.
And then some things for creating custom project types.
I'll talk just briefly about filters.
And the idea behind a filter is that it transforms
the document before final rendering.
You can implement lots and lots of things with filters.
Again, content generation, content filtering,
doing format-specific things.
I'll give an example of a filter
using the PanFlute library.
Here you can see I'm rendering a notebook,
and I'm saying, please run this filter
when the notebook is rendered.
This is the whole source code for the filter.
Most of it's just scaffolding the real,
this is a really trivially simple filter,
which basically says if there's a header,
then bump the header up by one.
So if there's a H3, make it an H,
or if there's a, sorry, if there's an H2,
make it an H3, and so on.
Really simple, but it turns out that filters
can do a lot of things, and many of the features
in Quarto are implemented as filters.
So cross-reference and citations, embedded languages,
macro substitution, image conversion.
And so we actually have dozens of filters built into Quarto,
but you can actually write your own filters.
So many times, users who want a feature
do not need to wait for us to implement the feature.
You can just implement shortcodes and filters
to get the functionality you want.
There's dozens of them you can find on our site,
but here's some examples.
Lightbox treatments for images in HTML,
a shortcode for embedding chemistry visualizations,
QR codes, more tailored options for how code is displayed.
So filters are a really, really powerful way
to extend the system.
There's a couple ways to write filters in Python.
Pandoc filters, which was from the creator of Pandoc,
and then Panflute, which is what I just showed.
It's a little more modern.
Lua filters, there's an embedded Lua interpreter in Pandoc
which you can use for zero dependencies,
and you can also write them in any language with JSON.
Finally, I just was now talking about
how to extend Quarto from within.
You can also embed Quarto in other workflows.
I believe later today, Hamill's gonna give a talk
about NBDev, which is a system for developing
Python packages entirely in Jupyter Notebooks,
and NBDev version two uses Quarto
to produce documentation websites from NBDev projects.
So lots of ways, since it's a command line tool,
to embed it in other workflows and customize it.
So that's all I have.
Would love to take questions.
We have a, Posit has a booth just out here,
so if we don't get to your questions now,
just come by, I'll be there,
and the rest of us will be there.
We'll happen to answer questions this afternoon.
Thank you.
Okay, are there any questions?
Yes.
Thank you very much for the presentation.
I have two questions.
The first question is, is it possible
to have some interactivity in the Quattro?
So can I, for example, interact with data
and re-render the website, something like that.
The second question, is it possible to use Quattro
as a rendering engine on GitHub?
So for example, I have repository of notebooks
and I opened the notebook in the GitHub,
so I would like to see the output from the Quattro.
Is it possible to use it?
Okay, so on interactivity,
there's a bunch of different ways to interactivity.
You can use Jupyter widgets.
You can use observable JavaScript.
You can also using, you can use Pyedide and Wasm
to embed interactive Python applications
inside Quattro documents.
So Quattro is, you know, it's deployed
as a client-side asset.
So the interactivity is gonna be all in JavaScript
and we're using Wasm and Pyedide,
but there are lots of different ways to do that.
And they're outlined on there.
We have a whole section about interactivity
that talks about all the different options
and how they work.
And then on GitHub, we have support for,
we have a Quattro publish command
that supports GitHub pages.
So it's very easy to say I have notebooks in a repository
and I want them to be published.
The GitHub viewer is controlled by GitHub.
So I, we're not able to,
and maybe there's an extension API
that we could use to override the default display,
but that is something that I don't know if is hookable,
but again, you can have,
GitHub can host the published notebooks using GitHub pages.
Hey, any more questions?
Yes.
Thank you.
Thanks for the nice talk.
Is Quattro going to replace some of the R packages
like block down and book down?
Yes, yes.
So Quattro is kind of the next generation.
We built a lot of things in within R Markdown
for things like books and blogs and websites.
And this is sort of our re-imagining of all that
that works with R and Python and Julia.
So it really is a replacement for those things.
And the future evolution of all those capabilities
are going to be in Quattro, not in those packages.
More questions?
We have time for another question if there is one.
Okay.
Thank you very much, Jason.
Thank you.